## Create a SSL directory

First of all create a directory where all the requests and certificates belong to:

	sudo mkdir /etc/nginx/ssl && cd /etc/nginx/ssl

## Create a Server Key

The next step is to create a key for the certificate you're installing later on:

	sudo openssl genrsa -des3 -out {domainname}.key 2048

Replace {domainname} with the real domain name of your website and remember the password you have to provide here.

## Create a Certificate Signing Request

	sudo openssl req -new -key {domainname}.key -out {domainname}.csr

**Important**: The requested common name should be the domain name you want to secure (at least in most cases).

## Remove the Password from the Server Key

If your key file is password protected, that password has to be provided each time the key file is used (on each (re-)start of nginx for example). So it's propably a good compromise to remove it.

	sudo cp {domainname}.key {domainname}.key.org
	sudo openssl rsa -in {domainname}.key.org -out {domainname}.key

## Order your Certificate

Now go and order your certificate. I have made good experiences with the cheap PositiveSSL certificates, they are currently as cheap as 7,55 EUR/year at [namecheap.com](https://www.namecheap.com/security/ssl-certificates/comodo/positivessl.aspx) and maybe even cheaper elsewhere.

## Install the Positive SSL Certificate for nginx

### Copy the files you got to /etc/nginx/ssl

The zip archive you received via email should contain the following files.

- AddTrustExternalCARoot.crt
- COMODORSAAddTrustCA.crt
- COMODORSADomainValidationSecureServerCA.crt
- {domainname}.crt

Copy them all to the ssl directory.

### Chain the Certificates

Your {domainname}.crt will work out of the box for most browsers, however some will reject the certificate, which results in a unusable site for your users. That occurs especially on current Android devices (tested with Android 5.0).

The reason for that is, frankly speaking, that these browsers don't know the source of the certificate. That can easily be changed by providing the information. To do so, chain the certificates you just copied to /etc/nginx/ssl.

	sudo bash -c 'cat {domainname}.crt COMODORSAAddTrustCA.crt COMODORSADomainValidationSecureServerCA.crt AddTrustExternalCARoot.crt > {domainname}-chained.crt'

### Configure your nginx server

Now add or edit your server's configuration and provide the following:

	server {
        listen 443;
        server_name {yourdomain};

        location / {
			# Configuration as usual
        }

        ssl on;
        ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/ssl/{domainname}-chained.crt;
        ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/ssl/{domainname}.key;

        ssl_session_timeout 5m;

        ssl_protocols TLSv1 TLSv1.1 TLSv1.2;
        ssl_ciphers "HIGH:!aNULL:!MD5 or HIGH:!aNULL:!MD5:!3DES";
        ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
	}

## That's it

Now you should be able to connecto through HTTPS to your website - congratulations!

PS: If you want to make sure everything is configured correctly from a security standpoint, check out the [Qualsys SSL Server Test](https://www.ssllabs.com/ssltest/analyze.html).

## *Update*

[Thilo](http://pingu.info/) pointed out, that there is even a serious offer of free certificates provided by [StartSSL](http://www.startssl.com/). I will give it a try in the future.
