Therefore it's convenient to check the availability of an established internet connection, so you can show some warnings or instructions if the device isn't connected.

Thankfully there's a simple solution around for years, see the [ReachabilitySample](https://github.com/xamarin/monotouch-samples/tree/master/ReachabilitySample) on GitHub. It's using some handy features that are baked-in in iOS. So it's not necessary to ping a server every x seconds, instead the operating system sends notifications about changes regarding the network connection you can subscribe to.

The bad thing is: That doesn't seem to work properly on iOS 8.3 anymore, so I had to do some investigation. At the end of it most of the class was gone, but what was left, is now working.

I won't do a pull-request because I deleted most of the public stuff and instead went for a much simpler API, that only tells if the device is connected or not. But maybe it's useful for someone else, so here it is:

    using System;
    using System.Net;
    using SystemConfiguration;
    using CoreFoundation;

    public enum NetworkStatus
    {
        NotReachable,
        ReachableViaCarrierDataNetwork,
        ReachableViaWiFiNetwork
    }

    public static class Reachability
    {
        private static NetworkReachability _defaultRouteReachability;

        public static event EventHandler ReachabilityChanged;

        public static bool IsNetworkAvailable()
        {
            if (_defaultRouteReachability == null)
            {
                _defaultRouteReachability = new NetworkReachability(new IPAddress(0));
                _defaultRouteReachability.SetNotification(OnChange);
                _defaultRouteReachability.Schedule(CFRunLoop.Current, CFRunLoop.ModeDefault);
            }

            NetworkReachabilityFlags flags;

            return _defaultRouteReachability.TryGetFlags(out flags) &&
                IsReachableWithoutRequiringConnection(flags);
        }

        private static bool IsReachableWithoutRequiringConnection(NetworkReachabilityFlags flags)
        {
            // Is it reachable with the current network configuration?
            bool isReachable = (flags & NetworkReachabilityFlags.Reachable) != 0;

            // Do we need a connection to reach it?
            bool noConnectionRequired = (flags & NetworkReachabilityFlags.ConnectionRequired) == 0;

            // Since the network stack will automatically try to get the WAN up,
            // probe that
            if ((flags & NetworkReachabilityFlags.IsWWAN) != 0)
                noConnectionRequired = true;

            return isReachable && noConnectionRequired;
        }

        private static void OnChange(NetworkReachabilityFlags flags)
        {
            var h = ReachabilityChanged;
            if (h != null)
                h(null, EventArgs.Empty);
        }
    }
