## A Good One: MvvmCross Messenger Plugin

Working with the [MvvmCross Messenger Plugin](https://www.nuget.org/packages/MvvmCross.Plugin.Messenger/) for a while now, I got used to the idea of just sending simple message objects that I can define myself.

All you need to do with that MvvmCross messenger is to create a new message type, derive it from MvxMessage and publish it.

The interface for sending is that simple. And even subscribing to messages of a certain types is that simple as well – you define the type of the message you want to listen to, a callback which gets a parameter of that message type, and you're basically done. Read more about it [here](https://github.com/MvvmCross/MvvmCross/wiki/MvvmCross-plugins#messenger).

## The Odd One: Xamarin.Forms MessagingCenter

If you're now taking a look at the [MessagingCenter of Xamarin.Forms](https://developer.xamarin.com/guides/xamarin-forms/messaging-center/), some things appear to be a bit odd:

1. When sending a message, you always **must** provide the sender. I don't know many cases from my very own experience where the sender is needed anyway.
2. What's called message here, is just a **magic string**. Everyone who's dealing with that "message" needs to know it. You better add a central class with some constants, when possible.
3. When subscribing to a message, you also have to know the **sender**. See my first point – if you almost never need the sender, what's the point in being forced to know it as a subscriber? That doesn't make sense to me, and at least it's making decoupling parts of the application harder than it needs to be.

## IMessenger – MessagingCenter Improved

I thought especially independence of sender and subscriber should be a goal worth doing some extra work. And here it is:

    public interface IMessage
    {
    }

    public interface IMessenger
    {
        void Send<TMessage>(TMessage message, object sender = null)
            where TMessage : IMessage;

        void Subscribe<TMessage>(object subscriber, Action<object, TMessage> callback)
            where TMessage : IMessage;

        void Unsubscribe<TMessage>(object subscriber)
            where TMessage : IMessage;
    }

    public class FormsMessenger : IMessenger
    {
        public void Send<TMessage>(TMessage message, object sender = null) where TMessage : IMessage
        {
            if (sender == null)
                sender = new object();

            MessagingCenter.Send<object, TMessage>(sender, typeof(TMessage).FullName, message);
        }

        public void Subscribe<TMessage>(object subscriber, Action<object, TMessage> callback) where TMessage : IMessage
        {
            MessagingCenter.Subscribe<object, TMessage>(subscriber, typeof(TMessage).FullName, callback, null);
        }

        public void Unsubscribe<TMessage>(object subscriber) where TMessage : IMessage
        {
            MessagingCenter.Unsubscribe<object, TMessage>(subscriber, typeof(TMessage).FullName);
        }
    }

Usage now is very straight-forward.

### 1. Define Your Message

    public class AlbumCreatedMessage : IMessage
    {
        public readonly Album Album;

        public AlbumCreatedMessage(Album album)
        {
            Album = album;
        }
    }

### 2. Send It Around

    var album = new Album
    {
        Id = Guid.NewGuid(),
        Title = "Hello World"
    };

    // An instance of IMessenger
    Messenger.Send(new AlbumCreatedMessage(album));

### 3. Subscribe To It

    // An instance of IMessenger
    Messenger.Subscribe<AlbumCreatedMessage>(this, AlbumAdded);

    private void AlbumAdded(object sender, AlbumCreatedMessage message)
    {
        // Do something
    }

### 4. When You're Done, Unsubscribe

    Messenger.Unsubscribe<AlbumCreatedMessage>(this);

I think that's a clean way to send and receive messages.
