## What we are looking for

- You want to develop mobile apps for iOS and Android using Xamarin and C#.
- Knowing C# is a big plus, but not a must-have if you feel very comfortable in at least one other programming language.
- Anything is possible: You are not afraid of tackling tricky problems.
- When you are revisiting code you wrote a while ago, you sometimes ask yourself what you were thinking. Other times, you are proud of the structure and elegance of your solution.
- Although you are not a designer, you have an eye for detail and a feeling for good UI and UX.
- You have an excellent command of written and spoken German and a good command of written and spoken English.
​
## 100% remote

In some of our projects, we have been working together purely remotely for a while now. Tools like Basecamp, Slack, and Hangouts help us collaborate wherever we are. This means that you can work with us from anywhere in the world, as long as

- you have a reliable internet connection,
- you have a quiet place to work, and
- your working hours partly overlap with ours.
​
## What you can expect

- Opportunity to work on challenging projects
- Competitive salary
- 30 days of paid annual leave
- Flexible working hours
- Current MacBook + 4K monitor
- Free public transport ticket + beverages when you're working with us at our office
​
## Contact us!

Send us an email (in German) at hallo@69grad.de that includes your resume and salary requirement. Also, show us what you have worked on in the past. We would love to see links to your blog or GitHub / Stack Overflow profiles, but if we are interested we will google you anyway ;-).

P.S. If you have doubts because you maybe do not fulfill all criteria, contact us anyway – sometimes it works out nonetheless.
​
## About us

We have been in business since 2007 and we have accomplished a lot over the years, both for our customers and in projects of our own. As a developer-only team, we speak a common language, enjoy programming, and love to talk shop about new technologies and trends. We are looking forward to your application!
